While many of us spend our time
digging to the depths of one subject after another,
putting they mysteries of life together,
it's often the most simple and obvious aspects of our lives
that trip us up, like human relationships.
This is Benig Mauger's territory.
Suffering from a broken heart,
she corralled her energy and talents
as a union psychotherapist to produce a lovely guide to love
called Love in the Time of a Broken Heart.
This book speaks of the universal search for love
and the beauty of what happens when love breaks down.
(inspirational music)
If there's a single person watching this
that has not experienced a broken heart
at one time or another and what it takes us through,
and you very carefully delineate
the experience of having a broken heart,
and it really takes us to the mat, as they say.
And, let's start with what sets us up
for the broken heart to begin with?
And looking at early childhood patterns
or familial patterns, for example.
Hmm, well I think that, as you say,
most of us will have, at some stage in our lives,
will experience a broken heart,
and, as you know from reading the book, it's...
I see it as not a bad thing, It's a transformational thing.
Yes.
I think that important thing here is
that we do repeat patterns.
We repeat patterns that are kind of familiar.
We also have, as women, we have an animus,
which is based on our image of our fathers,
and men have an anima,
which is based on their relationship with their mothers.
So, being the first male and female in our lives,
and they create, uh...
they create the inner images of the masculine and feminine.
So when we go out there, and we're attracted to
partners of the opposite sex, in this case, then,
usually, we are projecting onto these partners,
something that needs healing in ours...
Something that we feel we haven't got.
'Cause you know yourself, when you fall in love
you fall in love with something in the other person,
quality in the other person, that you feel attracted to,
and when we do that, we're usually repeating patterns,
and we're also healing emotional wounds from childhood,
though we don't know it.
Mm-hmm.
Let's look at a couple of common, or classical,
examples of how, as, let's start with the women,
how we would project, essentially,
our native relationship with our father,
onto another partner,
and then, ultimately, lead ourselves to this
place of devastation in some cases.
Yeah, ok, well, let's say that we have an exp...
and it might not always be fathers, either.
Let's say we have an experience of abandonment
at some point.
And it could be that we were separated at birth
from our mothers,
or we could feel that our fathers were never there for us,
and we have this hunger to relate
to the masculine in some way.
Then we will generally choose, unconsciously,
'cause it's the power of the unconscious,
(stammers) a partner who will be destined,
at some level, to betray us, to repeat the pattern,
because the psyche always seeks healing,
and it does that through bringing in
relationships and events into our lives
to give us the opportunity to heal the first wound.
And when you say, "betray us,"
that doesn't necessarily mean literally abandon us,
although it could lead to that.
Mm-hmm
It could
mean betrayal on a number of levels.
Let's take the abandonment issue and play that out.
What are some of the ways in which
the betrayals can show itself that will
push those same buttons without a literal abandonment?
Ok, well, (stammers) we might feel
that we're not getting enough love.
You never tell me you love me,
or I don't feel that you really love me,
and the more...
or, every time the man goes out,
did you meet someone else?
You know, we have a fear, so we create these situations
because that pushes the person away, doesn't it?
The more you want something,
the more the other person's going to move.
It's like a dance,
Mm-hmm
you know.
And, ultimately, we may say, we may push the person away.
Because of our fear of abandonment.
Because we're recreating it, do you know?
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
But it could take several stages, of course,
'cause the person might get fed up
and say, "Listen, I don't want to stay with you,
"you're so insecure."
And it's a
self-fulfilling prophecy,
they'll abandon you
Yeah, yeah,
That's right, exactly.
Of course.
Yes.
Now, when you're writing the book,
you're a great, I wouldn't say fan,
you use union psychology at the base of all of this,
and so you also use archetypal characters and such
that we can relate to in the journey, right?
And we're talking about the Aphrodite character,
and the Psyche character.
Yes.
And let's talk about that for a moment,
the basic archetypes.
Because you say we need to...
and your book is wonderful, it's an actual workbook,
where you can go through and identify
all of these particular constituents of your own life,
be it family, and your own patterns of thought,
and your own archetype and so forth.
Let's start with the archetype.
Which are the primary archetypes you're looking at?
Well, uh, with, (stammers) as we...
We have many archetypal influences in our lives,
but there are four,
and Carolyn Myss was the first person to talk about this.
There are four basic archetypes
that live with us and walk with us.
There's the inner child, which most people know about.
There's the inner saboteur,
the inner prostitute, which is not as bad as it sounds,
by the way, 'cause, as you know,
at the end of the book there's a beautiful...
There's a lot of stories in the book.
Yes.
And theres the inner, umm, what's the...
the inner victim.
So, the inner child is very active.
When, in love relationships, often,
if it's a wounded inner child that we have.
And what happens is that it recreates...
That energy within us will emerge,
or will become awakened in situations
of close relationships.
Relationships offer us the greatest opportunity
for spiritual growth.
Mm-hmm,
They really do.
absolutely.
And with each relationship, we grow.
You know, I have also had two divorces,
so I know a bit about relationships,
and what happens and what you project onto them.
The saboteur part of us will...
is the bit that will be self-destructive,
and will do the pushing away or
will create situations with the partner,
will feel, (gasps) you know, I don't know what to do.
Now, it happens on both sides,
not just on one side.
So what the book does is kind of
give you a chance to look in there
and do a bit of inner soul work.
About, well, what am I, what am I bringing to this?
You know, like my father, (stammers) myself, I...
The book is very, is very...
It's probably my most personal book, as well,
so I use myself also, and my own experience.
But my father was a very...
Is, God bless him, he's still with us, he's 97.
So, um, but he was very gifted, intellectually.
He was a man of writing, a man of ideas,
but not so good emotionally connecting.
So what, let's say I would have chosen partners
that I would have been attracted to their minds.
But, at the same time, I would have missed something.
You know?
So the saboteur in a situation like that
will kind of recreate that situation.
And then we might attract someone into our lives
that wants to make a commitment to us,
but the part of us that feels unworthy,
and we don't even know that we feel that sometimes,
will push that person away.
Mm-hmm.
So when we look at these patterns of behavior,
and, again, I'm coming from the feminine lens.
Because we're both women,
it's kind of an easy place to go
in a half an hour interview,
but these principles apply to men as well.
Yes.
But looking at the notion
that we're to be completely self-sufficient
and independent, that's what the times call for,
and yet, at the same time, be completely present
and open to deep connection.
This creates a lot of mixed signals to people today.
I think it does, and the reason is
because we have yet to establish a model
which combines vulnerability with strength.
Yes.
You know?
So that, uh, it's at one level, as you say,
we're taught to be self-reliant
and not to depend on anyone,
but at another level, we're not in our hearts,
we're not in our vulnerabilities.
So what it takes, really, is
the willingness to go the distance.
The willingness to endure,
and the willingness to do the inner work.
You know.
Right.
Because there is a tendency, I think,
and I think you'll agree with me,
in our modern society, in the west, particularly,
to kind of have instant gratification.
Ok, if that doesn't work right,
I'll go on, I'll get someone else, you know.
I mean, you know, you're not who I thought you were.
So that's it, I'm going to go out and find this person.
But it doesn't work like that.
Because don't you end up
confronting yourself again, and the same issues again?
Exactly, unless you're willing to look within,
and to...
And, in fact, as you know, the book is called
Love in the Time of Broken Hearts,
so it's dealing with what happens
when the relationship breaks down and you're alone.
But you've been given a huge opportunity
to come back to yourself.
As you say, a broken heart actually can,
if we choose to be conscious through this experience,
can lead us to the greatest wholeness
within.
Absolutely.
Absolutely, yes.
And along this journey,
you say there, again, there are things
we have to identify in order to be able to
find our way back to wholeness and...
What do you mean by identifying patterns
and identifying your story?
Ok, well, that's something that's, um...
It emerged as I was writing the book.
In terms of a new (stammers)...
work that needs to be continued a little bit.
But, basically, we create our own birth myth.
We create our own story.
We are born with,
because of the archetypal predispositions,
we are born with preexisting kind of...
We are predisposed to experience life in a particular way.
Do you mean, again, as in these archetypes,
Yes, I do.
like a victim,
as the victim or what, and saboteur?
Well, also the family history.
And the family history, yes.
You see, that's the vital thing.
Because the mother...
When you're mother's womb,
you are picking up all the fa...
You've got all the history of the family,
the history of how women are in the family,
any of the wounds that are there,
the interaction between mother and father,
all of that.
So, um, so you come in and you may...
I tell you how you find out,
because people will say, "Well, how do I know?
"How do you find out your story?"
If you find that you resonate with a particular story,
like Cinderella or, in my case, it was The Little Mermaid,
or Rapunzel, and there are lots of male ones as well,
then that will give you a clue.
If it resonates with you when you were a child
and you loved it,
it will give you a clue as to what
archetypal energy you're living out,
and if you believe...
See, while we're employed in our story,
we're not open to the transcendent power of love
because it's employed by the story.
So, for example, and in the book it's...
there's a lot of stories,
I identified with the Little Mermaid.
I was just going to ask,
"What does that mean?"
And, The Little Mermaid, as you know,
is the story of impossible love.
I mean, she falls in love with the prince,
but she (stammers)
the message there is,
you can't get this without giving in,
giving up your most precious possession,
your voice.
So at a deep psychological level,
it's about the failure, in this case,
or the need to emerge from the maternal,
from childhood.
Yes.
Because, in fairy stories, the man,
the prince, has to find the princess,
the king has to find the queen, etcetera, etcetera,
and they represent our counterpart.
Like the prince in The Little Mermaid
is her inner man, which will in...
her inner...
other half, which will enable her to come to wholeness
and emerge an adult woman.
Yes.
Do you see?
So, in The Little Mermaid, it's terribly sad
and, you know, it's so...
If you identify with that,
then maybe you are thinking that love is impossible,
and I'll never find it.
And you think that
you had a lot of that in you?
I, definitely, most definitely,
Yes.
absolutely.
What about Sleeping Beauty?
Sleeping Beauty is another one, she...
Is that yours?
(Benig laughs)
Yes.
I really loved that,
I identified with Sleeping Beauty.
Well, the Sleeping, the Sleeping Beauty,
also is...
she's waiting for...
She's unconscious.
So she's waiting for the prince to wake her up.
Yes.
So she's not, um...
There's a tendency, with the Sleeping Beauty,
not to actually do the work.
Mm-hmm.
She wants to remain, she remains unconscious.
There's also more, it's more complicated there,
because there's also the witch,
Yes.
who would represent the negative feminine.
Yeah.
You know, or the devouring mother.
Same in Snow White,
there's the stepmother and there's the jealousy.
That's the huge thing,
jealousy between mothers and daughters.
And so there's...
All the stories have very rich (stammers)
very rich material to look at.
And sometimes people identify,
not with the even fairy story,
but just with certain film stars or...
Excuse me.
In certain roles,
certain film roles,
Yes.
characters in books and
novels and films.
Yes.
And from an archetypal perspective,
if you identify with the goddess Aphrodite,
you would be identified with beauty
and you would be very taken up by
things to do with physical beauty
and romance and sexuality,
and you might identify with Marilyn Monroe or,
you know, whoever it is.
And it's fun, because, you know, it's normal,
and we all do it.
(Benig laughs)
Yes, yes.
But you say that in beginning to understand
these characters that we're attracted to,
we can start seeing our own vulnerabilities
and the holes in our own development and learning.
Yeah, in the book, when I...
in the chapters that deal with that,
at the end of the chapter, I say,
"So what story are you living out of?
"Begin, take a piece of paper and begin the story.
"Once upon a time there was..."
You know, a little boy, a little girl, whatever.
And it means that you're dialoging with your inner soul,
And it means that you're dialoging with your unconscious.
Yes, and that's extremely effective.
Absolutely.
To look back on that,
if one's really in a truly open and reflective place,
and to see these myths that we're still holding onto.
For example, if we have not done the work, yes.
Yeah, and it's not about, you know,
it's not about getting rid of these things.
It's more about becoming conscious of them.
Like, there'll probably be a part of me
that'll always be a bit of a little mermaid, really.
But, at the same time, I think I've, you know,
I think I probably occasionally wear the fins.
But I would not be...
go the whole distance now,
because, you know, it's not going to work out.
Right, right, right, exactly.
So, you, no...
But it's also about, actually,
I know this sounds a bit corny and and things,
but it's also about, when you have enough self love,
when you come to that place of wholeness,
you will naturally attract somebody who's equally
at the same place as you, you know?
Because you won't be playing out the old patterns again.
Right, the charge isn't there,
the need for attracting the opposite charge,
so to speak, too, as a mirror.
As a mirror, but the thing that's important is while,
(clears throat) and I think you'd agree with me there,
is that there's great power, as a therapist I know this,
there's great power in emotional wounds.
Great healing power in emotional wounds,
'cause everybody wants to heal.
And, you know, there is a phenomenon
that I've noticed in going through life
from the time I was young with the first broken heart,
that whenever I had a broken heart,
I noticed that when I would emerge out into the world,
say, after an evening of being in tears,
or in a fitful sleep,
I'd go out into the world,
I noticed that my being was so opened.
Yes.
So sensitive and alive,
and I thought, isn't that interesting,
that the...
in this kind of drama, in this kind of pain,
colors are brighter, I can feel everybody's feelings,
everything is just more alive,
I'm more sensitive to everything.
And is there a place in what you teach
for us to be able to maintain that kind of
open sensitivity without having...
being in the midst of that kind of pain?
Yes, I think what you're talking about is boundaries,
really, and that's where...
and that's another book, the earlier book,
that's where the father comes in.
If we have a good sense of boundaries within us,
personal boundaries, which we get from father,
you know, the sense of...
then we can know, we can protect
the vulnerable part of us.
Because the masculine takes the feminine
out into the world because he loves her,
so he protects her.
And it means that we can be in that open place,
but we can also be minding ourselves.
It's quite a dance, a very artful dance.
It is, but, you know, it's beautiful.
And, in fact, you know,
obviously we've had a discussion before, off camera,
about the tango.
But the tango, it offers the opportunity,
it's a perfect dance of love and the inner marriage,
and balance.
It definitely is
Yes.
but we both have
a passion for Argentine tango, yes.
But, so, that is the challenge, I think, for us.
Which is probably, you know, one of the reasons
why I've been speaking at this conference
about consciousness.
Because that is what we need to be able to...
where we need to be able to be.
To stay in the heart, but to fe...
to protect ourselves, also.
And protection doesn't mean shutting down.
Right, and that's a mistake
a lot of people make.
I know, and that's the message in the book,
that don't shut do...
In fact, once you've had your heart opened
and really experienced heartbreak,
you will find that it's hard to shut down.
You know that, in fact, you know,
there is a tendency to try and do it,
but if your heart has really been opened,
the hope is that you will always be able to go back there
and, if you do the work, be able to
protect yourself at the same time.
And speaking of the work,
we want to...
I would like to finish this interview with
the tasks you talk about toward the end of the book,
which are mythological in nature,
and you're talking about Psyche at this point,
and her journey, but...
Let's talk about task one: Sorting Seeds.
I want to go through the four of them,
just very briefly, so we can see what is...
what our charge is in this expansion of consciousness
to find our place to this place where we're strong
yet able to really exude the sensitive and the feminine
and not lost that.
Yes.
Well, in the book I've used the story of Amour and Psyche,
and Psyche, of course, has to go through all these tasks
when she loses Amour,
in order to get back to him again.
So, the sorting of the seeds, um...
I won't have time to give the whole mythology
of it,
No, just
very briefly, essence of it.
Yes, very briefly.
Well, it means, basically it means
having to stand back and look at your patterns, basically.
Look at all the things that are going on.
Ok, is this me, is this him?
What am I putting into this situation that is mine,
that I need to look at?
Am I behaving as an abandoned child?
Did I push him away?
This kind of thing, so it's about sorting,
sorting things, sorting, going inside and doing--
Taking stock, yeah.
Taking stock, sorting out, looking at the patterns within.
Mm-hmm.
That's what the sorting of the seeds is,
'cause they each go into their own pile,
as you know.
Right, and then tasks, too--
I'm sorry, before I go on to task two,
and she is helped, of course, by ants, loads of ants,
and they represent our intuition.
Our inner voice that we often don't listen to.
And the ants come
and they help her sort through,
carry the seeds.
They help her
sort through,
go pile to pile.
Cause she couldn't do it on her own, yes.
Yes, so she is receiving
the intuitive assistance.
Yes.
Task two, Acquiring Some Golden Fleece.
Now, that's an interesting one,
because it, basically, the...
To get the Golden Fleece she has to
get them from these very fierce solar rams,
which would damage her and trample over her.
So it's symbolic, and, as you know, she does it,
but, again, she's helped.
She does it at night, when the rams are asleep,
so she gets the wool from the briars they brushed against.
And this symbolizes the taking of one's power,
but indirectly.
Not doing it, woof, straight out.
It's about negotiating power,
negotiating your own personal power
and I don't mean power over.
I mean your own assertion.
Without knowing when to do it,
and not putting yourself in the firing line,
where you won't, you know, you'll be trampled,
but doing it indirectly, in a way that will service you.
Yes.
And--
Somewhere a feminine essence of power.
Very much feminine and, in fact,
because it's a myth about a woman,
it's very much connected with feminine psychology.
But it's something which, for women, is a tricky issue.
Yes,
Power.
Yes, it is.
It's seen in the world.
It's something we usually give away.
Yeah, because of a lot of the ways that we might be seen,
you know, as an animus woman,
or, you know, a masculine-type woman,
and we...
It's not an easy thing, to find the balance.
No, it isn't.
Ok, task three, Filling the Golden Flask.
Yeah, now, the Golden Flask, again,
now the eagle comes to her aid.
That is about gaining perspective.
And again, it's to do with incorporating
what comes from father.
It's the ability to look at the bigger picture.
Because she has to collect water from the very top,
right down that goes in,
the river that goes down, right through.
It's the circle of life.
So it's the ability and the eagle represents
the aspect that enables us to see things
form a higher perspective.
So it's contact with our higher self.
Mm-hmm.
Really, with your higher self.
Right.
And the ability to get, gain a perspective,
so you're not lost in the emotions.
And of course we're lost in the emotions,
we'er basket cases some of the time.
For a while, until we learn to take the distance.
Yes,
Now, how about task four: Learning to Say No.
This is a really big one and you...
we have a little time and you can
spend a little time on this, Learning to Say No.
Yeah, and it's, it's, it is a big one.
Learning to say no, but, you see,
she has to go into the Underworld in the fourth task,
and on the way into the Underworld,
which, basically, is symbolic of letting go of the ego,
you know, of just letting go and being there.
And on the way into the Underworld,
she's going to be asked for help from people,
helpless people, and she needs...
she's been told she has to refuse to help them,
and to say, "No."
And the power of saying no four times
means she exercises the power of choice.
So, again, as you say, it sometimes can be
hard to-to say no, as-as women,
a lot of us, and I have children, and, you know,
a lot of us are conditioned to...
and we feel it, you know, to listen to the needs of others,
to attend to others needs rather than our own.
And this is the task of being discerning,
and being able to say no to others
when it means we might be compromising ourselves.
And in love relationships, that's a huge thing.
'Cause so many of us travel down the wrong roads
looking for love,
and we might compromise ourselves in an attempt to get it.
Are we stay with the person
because we just want to be loved?
So if we say no, it means we're looking after ourselves.
So in this journey,
we interviewed someone else a couple of days ago
on the Secrets of Letting Go.
In this journey, and the journey you've personally taken,
what is it that you feel we essentially need
to be prepared to let go of in order to be able to
give birth to this more mature version of ourselves?
That's quite complex.
But we have to basically let go of our sense of immortality,
and I don't mean that literally, I mean the ego.
The journey that we think we want,
we have to be able to let go of what we think we want
to allow what needs to emerge to come through.
Do you know what I mean?
Yes.
We also have to be able to say no to
some of our instinctual...
to some of our drives, you know.
Because if we learn to do that,
then we are in communion with ourselves.
With our souls, with the part of us,
the deeper part of ourselves.
You know, to say no to the impulse
to get involved with somebody when we know it's not right,
Right.
you know, and that we will end up getting hurt.
As I say, it's not--
And when we know we're not ready.
I mean,
Yes.
it could be a timing thing,
it can be a personality thing, whatever, you know.
Or that it will, in some way, you know, damage us.
And it's not about closing down
and not going out there again,
but it's about knowing yourself.
Yeah.
So letting go of a lot of preconceptions,
a lot of ideas that we might have
about what we really want,
I need this, I need that.
Forget it, in a way, and rest for a bit,
and come to your center.
Because when you come to your center,
you encounter the still point,
and in the still point...
There's a beautiful saying, beautiful,
and I have it on my website, it's,
"It is said that what you are seeking is also seeing you.
"So if you sit still, it will come to you."
Ah, that's very beautiful.
Yes.
And what's wonderful about this book is
it's not a dry read, it's not a psychological
perspective
No.
or profile of all of this.
You actually set out to write a novel
and you went to the Sierra Madre, as I understand,
in Spain, you went to the mountains for a little while?
I went to the Sierra Nevada
for a little while.
Sierra Nevada,
yes.
and then
I finished it in Ireland, where I come from.
Which is also in the middle of the country.
So you really went on this journey of
having to look at the discipline required to write this book
and, at the same time, finding that
you weren't ready on certain days.
You couldn't do the task, and you had to
let go.
You read that bit?
Oh, yeah.
And that you had to, yourself, learn to
honor what was really going on in you,
even though you had your own self-imposed deadline.
And so this really was for you a journey of
learning to honor yourself completely as well,
and you share beautiful stories in a novel style
about other people's experience
that help us see ourselves in this.
So my compliments to you.
You've done a
Thank you.
beautiful job of writing a very readable book
that allows anyone access to the knowledge,
and to be able to do the work along with it.
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
It's very nicely done.
Any final thoughts before we go?
No, I think that, if anything,
and I said in the beginning of the book,
in the introduction, that it is a message of hope.
In terms of a huge thing that's happening
in the modern world.
People have had broken hearts since the beginning of time.
Since love, you know, love has always existed.
But there is, at the moment, I think,
a great fear of relationship.
Yeah.
And of the heart.
And so it is really a message of hope
and it's (stammers) it's wonderful.
Yes, it is,
it genuinely is,
Yes.
and you can
Thank you.
find yourself at the bottom of all of it.
That's the gift.
Thank you.
Thank you, also.
I hope you enjoyed the interview.
You can go to Amazon or other booksellers
to pick up a copy of Benig's book,
Love in the Time of a Broken Heart.
Until next time, thanks for watching
Conscious Media Network.
(inspirational music)